Corpus Analysis: Edgar Allen Poe

Going into the assignment, I initially had taken a look towards Macbeth and comparing it with a movie script mostly as a joke. However looking into the N-grams of both individual scripts I noticed a pattern within the writing, specifically with how often certain characters are brought up within the context of the story. I found that within both scripts the main character names and titular subject were brought up quite frequently, but not as often as I had expected. Certain lines were frequently reused in dialogue to emphasis an element within the plot, if I had been reading the scripts normally I likely would not have noticed the nuances and style within the text. After this discovery I decided to focus on a different subject, instead I decided to compare the early stories written by Edgar Allen Poe. The stories I observed were the following. "The Balloon Hoax", "Four Beasts in One", "The Unparalleled Adventures of One Hans Pfaal", "Ms. Found in a Bottle", "The Oval Portrait", "The Murders in the Rue Morgue", "The Mystery of Marie Roget" (A sequel to the Rue Morgue story), and "The Gold-Bug".

There were many interesting N-grams to be found within the short stories, one I personally found to be most peculiar was the line "it was not". When I had looked into it I assumed that it was going to be just a common phrase littered throughout that didn't go anywhere. The phrase had come up 27 times between 5 of the stories I researched. While the frequency was not nearly as large as some of the others I found this specific string of words to be particularly interesting due to the context and content of the stories that it showed up in. The most frequent usage especially being in the "The Murders in the Rue Morgue" and its sequel "The Mystery of Marie Roget," both being murder mysteries and connected to one another. 

Within the context of the stories that showed clusters of the phrase, "it was not" was usually used in order to determine a conclusion by eliminating potential possibilities. Worded in a way reminiscent of the scientific method, by thinking through the possibilities and determining what they subject could NOT be first and foremost. Another potential intention I found when looking deeper was also using the phrase to describe the situation by telling the reader what was NOT happening. Clearly describing what happened but in a way that indicated something else did not occur. This was also a fairly frequent way of describing the flow of time by mentioning events did not occur until a specific point.