Thomas Hammer
Janis Filbeck
ENGL 15
October 31st, 2020
The Blue Truth
Avid cell phone users may know the feeling of being jolted awake by the bright flash and small buzz of their cellular device. Those that have experience with such an event would understand checking it would lead to a restless night as they continue to browse after being woken up, hoping to fall asleep eventually. Like those who have gone through the motions before already know, it seldom ends that way. But this is not a new issue that the general public has yet to be informed of. The subject has been addressed before in countless research journals and academic studies previously published by many astute researchers associated with upper-class colleges. The issue has a history of being criticized in the past. Many companies and even ordinary people have taken it upon themselves to filter out the blue light emitted. Still, it’s only a half-baked solution that doesn’t truly fix the problem. Smartphone users are often checking their devices during the night before bed; doing so forces their eyes to focus on the screen, causing eye strain, sleep deprivation, and even in extreme cases, macular degeneration. The long-lasting effects of the blue light emitted from the screen are capable of disrupting the human circadian rhythm, creating frequent migraines, and damaging the users’ eyesight. Blue lights from cellphones and other electronic devices have adverse effects on our eyes, brains, and sleep cycle that have become a normalized predicament most modern society members face today and have become utterly numb towards. We, as a society, have become dependent on our devices and are unable to understand the need to start limiting exposure. By learning to limit this liability, we can lessen the adverse effects caused and learn to use our devices effectively and efficiently.
Some people may be confused as to why exposure to blue light is an issue; after all, there are benefits to blue light usage. As shown in a study performed by Lehrl and colleagues, blue light can not only boost alertness in people, but it also assists in mood elevation, memory, and cognitive function (03). Some individuals may inquire what the point is if the issue has been addressed, handled, and proven beneficial in some aspects? Indeed, the matter seems relatively open and shut, but what’s often not mentioned or addressed are the harmful effects introduced through continuous exposure. The benefits previously discussed often is minute in the presence of the more significant effects brought on by constant blue-light exposure. 
But to acknowledge the suitable means that the opposite must be a considered factor. New settings made to filter the blue light emitted through our computers and TVs are being incorporated. What else is needed? The topic is quite well known and has been acknowledged by the developers and distributors of cell phones and other various blue-light emitting devices. Devices such as iPhones and Androids have many programs available for download on their respective app stores, which can filter the blue light through their phone with desktop and laptops supporting nighttime filter settings. 
Indeed, under the solutions mentioned above, it comes across as though the matter has been addressed and solved. But what these solutions don’t inform you of is the ongoing effects caused by the light in the day to day life. We’re so used to pulling out our devices for work or social purposes that the thought of what they’re doing to our eyes has been erased. But the adverse side effects to come aren’t something to be brushed aside as an inevitable minor inconvenience; we should be aware and active in our knowledge of what is done to our eyes and how we can limit it.
The method in which blue light strains the eye is achieved through regular exposure. This is especially prevalent at night; it is not thought about when the dull sting begins to form behind the retina as they take in every bit of blue light without a filter. By deciding to send a text message, the eyes receive the blue light emitted filterless. Hence the presence of the strain in the back of the eye as opposed to the cornea. As shown in Acharya and her colleague’s study, students received questionnaires regarding their frequent cell phone usage. Many reported eye strain as a common symptom in their continual use of the device, a sum of 161 subjects reported eye strain after long-term exposure to their devices (Acharya et al. 2). As the authors point out, these students would stare at these wide or pocket-sized screens and experience optical pains. Understandably so, visual health experts worry about the long-lasting strain of the blue light from mobile devices and the potential effects long term exposure may cause. Once upon a time, children would be told by their parents not to sit close to the television; otherwise, they may damage their eyes. It seems that their concerns may not have been in vain as not only have the TVs they were so worried about grown to wall covering sizes, but they’ve also taken the form of smaller cellular devices their children cannot part with just to get some well-needed sleep after a long day.
It is quite common today for individuals to take their phone out in the middle of the night and check it for notifications. Instead of lying down to recharge our metaphorical batteries, we use the time to scroll through our phones and stare at the bright screen in front of us. As many have experienced in the past, this winds up hurting our sleep cycle. Suddenly, we can’t fall asleep, and to pass the time, we continue to browse through our handheld supercomputer in hopes that the process might eventually tire us out. It seems hoping to tire over time may be a fruitless endeavor; Jo Phipps-Nelson from Monash university conducted a study that observed the effects of nocturnal exposure to blue light to determine if sleepiness was in any way affected. The results decided that low-intensity blue light had the potential to boost alertness during nighttime testing. This means that in the process of looking into the blue light for the nighttime testing, the attentiveness of the subject was being boosted and suppressing the desire to sleep. In a sense, their mind was being convinced by the blue light to stay active rather than hit the sack.
Lastly, for those unaware of macular degeneration (AMD), it is caused by the decay of the central portion of the retina. This portion is the inside back layer of the eye that records the images we see and sends them via the optic nerve from the eye to the brain. The retina's central portion, known as the macula, is responsible for focusing central vision in the eye. It controls our ability to read, drive a car, recognize faces or colors, and see objects in smooth detail. As indicated by the study from H.R. Taylor et al., those that had established cases of AMD also had much higher exposure to blue light within the last 20 years (4). While there were no differences between age groups, it is theorized that high exposure levels later in life are a potential cause (P.5). Put simply, excessive exposure to blue light can lead to blurred or wavy vision; in advanced AMD cases, it may even result in being diagnosed as legally blind. Our tight ties to technology come with consequences. Like Turkle indicated in her article, the relationship we hold with our machines, while seemingly beneficial in some cases, can have depressing effects on not just our physical health but the mental state as well.
At this point, someone may be wondering where this may be going, bringing up the different symptoms; after all, they’re common knowledge, aren’t they? People know what they’re getting into when they use their devices day in and day out. Indeed the need to limit the exposure to blue light is nothing more than a needless precaution? But this is precisely why we must turn our attention back towards a situation we have chosen to ignore in recent times. Just because the knowledge is common doesn’t mean that it’s being taken seriously. By bringing this to the people’s attention, especially users of digital devices that emit blue light, we may limit or eliminate the problem. By learning to lower our exposure to blue light and, by extension, remember to take time away from our devices, we allow ourselves to be able to live our lives to their fullest without the distraction of the blinding blue light that threatens our retinas. 
As mentioned previously, various applications have been created to filter blue light’s effects on our eyes, particularly applications found on smartphones and settings built into computers. Often called a “Night Light,” these functions typically include the ability to schedule when you wish for the filter to be activated. This system is particularly useful for avid users of their devices or those who work late nights and struggle to fall asleep. Their minds continue to wander due to their increased alertness and disrupted sleep cycle. Blue light filtering spectacles have been made as well to assist individuals with poor eyesight as well as struggling with blue light exposure. It is possible for those who do not require glasses to buy some for themselves and wear later in the day. College students are quite commonly found awake at night studying for their intensive classes, and such glasses would be quite useful so that they may be able to receive a good night's rest after their long day. A final solution to this problem that is quite common, cheaper, but requires more willpower on the user’s part is to stop using their devices an hour before bed. Take the time to unwind with another activity and allow your mind to settle as it readies itself to recharge for the night.
Blue light emitted from digital devices while being a necessary component to technology that brings along benefits in the current day, also come with its nasty side effects. That includes but isn’t limited to stress in the back of the eyes, loss of rest due to disruption of the circadian sleep cycle, and possibly permanent damage to the optics, resulting in blindness. The solution to the problem is quite simple in hindsight, and as most people can likely agree with, it should be acted upon. Our devices are made to assist and accommodate us; we cannot allow them to damage our health or our minds instead.
Works Cited
Acharya et al,. A Study on Some of the Common Health Effects of Cell-Phones amongst College Students. J Community Med Health Educ 2013, 3:4
https://www.omicsonline.org/a-study-on-some-of-the-common-health-effects-of-cell-pho
nes-amongst-college-students-2161-0711.1000214.php?aid=14036
Philips-Nelson et al,. “Blue Light Exposure Reduces Objective Measures of Sleepiness during
    Prolonged Nighttime Performance Testing”. Chronobiology International. 2009. 26:5,
    891-912.
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/0742052090304436
S. Leryl et al,. “Blue light improves cognitive performance”. Journal of Neural Transmission. 
    Jan 25 2007.114. 457–460. 
    https://doi.org/10.1007/s00702-006-0621-4
Taylor et al,. Visible light and risk of age-related macular degeneration. American 
    Ophthalmological Society. 1990; 88: 163–178.
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1298584/
Turkle, Sherry. “Can You Hear Me Now?” They Say/I Say: The Moves That Matter in Academic 
    Writing. Graff, Gerald, Birkenstein, Cathy, and Russel Durst. New York, NY. W. W.  
    Norton & Company. 2009. 9780393931747. pp. 270-281.